        Implementation of Schumann-Runge band parameterization
        ------------------------------------------------------


Reference
---------

The calculation of the equivalent absorption cross section of O2 in the
Schumann-Runge bands is done according to

Gaston Kockarts, Penetration of solar radiation in the Schumann-Runge bands of
molecular oxygen:  A robust approximation,  Annales Geophysicae, v12, n12, pp.
1207 ff., Dec 1994:

"For a monochromatic radiation, the absorption of solar photons is governed by
Beer-Lambert's law.  The Schumann-Runge bands system can be assimilated to a
set of 16 000 spectral points with different cross sctions at every 0.5 cm-1
between 49 000 and 57 000 cm-1.  The whole spectral interval is divided into 16
subintervals, each having a width of 500 cm-1.  Using the formulation given by
Kockarts (1971, 1976), it is possible to define reduction factors for each 500
cm-1 interval as
                    1000
              1     ___
    R_j(M) = ---- x >    Exp(-tau_ij)                                       (1)
             1000   ---
                    i=1

and                 
                     1000
               1     ___
    R_j(O2) = ---- x >   e_j x sigma_ij x Exp(-tau_ij)                      (2)
              1000   ---
                     i=1

where j corresponds to a 500 cm-1 interval, tau_ij is the slant optical depth
for O2 in interval j for wave number corresponding to index i, e_j is the
predissociation efficiency in interval j, and sigma_ij is the O2 absorption
cross section.

[...]

Having computed the reduction factors (1) and (2), the solar irradiance
Phi_j(z) at altitude z is given for each 500 cm-1 interval by

Phi_j(z) = Phi_j(oo) x R_j(M) x Exp[-tau_j(O3)],                            (4)

where Phi_j(oo) is the solar irradiance at the top of the atmosphere in the
wave number interval j and tau_j(O3) is the slant optical depth resulting from
ozone absorption in the same interval.

[...]

The photodissociation coefficient J_j(O2) for molecular oxygen is obtained from
expression

J_j(O2) = Phi_j(oo) x R_j(O2) x Exp[-tau_j(O3)].                            (6)

Rayleigh scattering is neglected in Eqs. (4)-(6).

[...]

The definition of the reduction factors given by Eqs. (1) and (2) show that
these quantities are a sum of 1000 exponentials with always negative arguments.
The present approximation is based on the same mathematical structure.
Therefore, the exact expressions are replaced by

R_j(M) = a1 x exp(-a2 x N) + a3 x exp(-a4 x N) + ... + a11 x exp(-a12 x N)  (7)

and

R_j(O2) = b1 x exp(-b2 x N) + b3 x exp(-b4 x N) + ... + b11 x exp(-b12 x N),(8)

where N is the slant O2 total content and a1-a12 and b1-b12 are numerical
coefficients to be found. 

[...]

The approximations have been developed to cover a decrease by a factor of 1E10
for all R_j(M) and R_j(O2).  As an example, Figs. 5 and 6 show the results
obtained in the interval 51 000.5-51 500.0 cm-1.  One sees that the
approximation holds for the 1E10 range of variation for the reduction factors.
      Similar results are obtained for the 16 wave number intervals and the a_i
and b_i coefficients are given in Tables a and 2, respectively. 

[...]

Allen and Fredrick (1982) noted that optical paths with the same O2 column but
different zenith angles may have significantly different transmission and
dissociation rates.  As a consequence, they introduced a zenith angle dependent
factor in the polynomial approximation of effective cross sections.  Nicolet
and Kennes (1989) used a similar approach.  In both cases, there is a maximum
value for the solar zenith anfle and the approximation is a function of
sec(Chi).  It is well known that sec(Chi) should be replaced by a Chapman
function for zenith angles greater than 65 degrees, so that a polynomial
correction depending on sec(Chi) should lead itself to errors for large zenith
distances."


Bibliography:

Allen, M. and J.E.Frederick, Effective photodissociation cross sections for
molecular oxygen and nitric oxide in the Schumann-Runge bands, J.Atmos.Sci.,
39, 2066-2075, 1982.

Nicolet, M. and R.Kennes, Aeronomic problems of molecular oxygen
photodissociation - VI. Photodissociation frequency and transmittance in the
spectral range of the Schumann-Runge bands, Planet.Space Sci., 37, 4590491,
1989.

Kockarts, G., Penetration of solar radiation in the Schumann-Runge bands of
molecular oxygen, in Mesospheric models and related experiments, Ed. G.Fiocco,
pp. 160-176, D.Reidel, 1971.

Kockarts, G., Absorption and photodissociation in the Schumann-Runge bands of
molecular oxygen in the terrestrial atmosphere, Planet.Space Sci., 24, 589-604,
1976.


Application
-----------
 
In the model atmosphere, consisting of nz-1 homogeneous layers, we can derive
the equivalent absoprtion cross section of molecular oxygen and the effective
O2 vertical optical depth from Kockarts (1994), Eqs. (4) and (6):

It is 

J_j(O2,z) = Phi_j(oo) x R_j(O2,z) x Exp[-tau_j(O3,z)]                       (6)

but also

J_j(O2,z) = Phi_j(z) x sigma_j(O2,z).

With

Phi_j(z) = Phi_j(oo) x R_j(M,z) x Exp[-tau_j(O3,z)],                        (4)

we get

sigma_j(O2,z) = R_j(O2,z) / R_j(M,z) 

as an expression for the equivalent O2 absorption cross section in each 500
cm-1 wide subinterval j.


We generalize Eq. (4) to

Phi_j(z) = Phi_j(oo) x R_j(M,z) x T_j(z)                                    (4')

with T(z) representing a generic transmission function that accounts for
attenuation and absorption by everything but molecular O2.

The total slant optical depth of layer z (between level z and z+1) can be 
written as

tau_j(total,z) =  Log[Phi_j(z+1)/Phi_j(z)]
               =  Log[R_j(M,z+1)/R_j(M,z)] + Log[T_j(z+1)/T_j(z)].

We can now define

taus_j(O2,z) = Log[R_j(M,z+1)/R_j(M,z)]

as the slant optical depth of layer z due to O2, and

taus_j(*,z) = Log[T_j(z+1)/T_j(z)]

as the slant optical depth of layer z due to everything but O2.  Therefore, as a
first (and hopefully good) approximation, the O2 vertical optical depth of
layer z can be written as

tauv_j(O2,z) = Log[R_j(M,z+1)/R_j(M,z)] / sec(Chi)  for Chi < 75 deg

and 

tauv_j(O2,z) = Log[R_j(M,z+1)/R_j(M,z)] / Chap(Chi) for 75 deg <= Chi < 95 deg.

At the top of the atmosphere, we define a total overhead O2 column of zero,
resulting in a O2 optical depth of zero (for the non-existing layer nz), and
consequently calculate the reduction factors R_j(M) and R_j(O2) according to 

R_j(M,nz) = a1 + a3 + a5 + a7 + a9 + a11,

and

R_j(O2,nz) = b1 + b3 + b5 + b7 + b9 + b11.


Implementation
--------------

The parameterization suggested by Kockarts (1994) is performed on the original
grid, and values for the vertical optical depth of O2 and for the equivalent O2
absorption cross section are calculated on the 16 wavelength intervals between
57 000 and 49 000 cm-1 (seto2.f, schu.f).  Then, an internal working grid is
defined, utilizing the full resolution of Kockart's grid in the SR-bands and
of the Brasseur-Solomon/DeMore data outside the SR-bands.  The effective O2
absorption cross sections and O2 optical depths values on this internal grid 
within the SR-bands are taken straight from Kockart's parameterization, outside 
the SR-bands the cross section data from Brasseur and Solomon (1986) (up to 
204 nm)  and DeMore et al. (1994) (for wavelengths longer than 204 nm) are used
for the absorption cross section and to derive the corresponding values for the
O2 optical depth.  The data are then interpolated onto the user-defined working
grid.


Bibliography:

Brasseur, G.P. and S.Solomon, Aeronomy of the Middle Atmosphere, 2nd Edition,
pg.144 ff, D.Reidel Publishing Company, 1986.

DeMore, W.B. et al., Chemical Kinetics and Photochemical Data for Use in
Stratospheric Modeling, Evaluation Number 11, JPL Publication 94-26, pg.113 f.,
Dec 15, 1994.
